

## Process
A highlight of the steps that the script runs through to create all of the CSV files.

### Data Structures Used
```
type lpMap struct {
  ToInt int
  SentEvents int
  ReceivedEvents int
}
```

1. Argument Parsing
2. Read model_summary.json file
  a. find order of the internal data structures
  b. Connect to event data CSV file and prepare a reader
3. Process the input file twice. First time building a map of string->lpMap structure. Second time store events into our internal data structures (what does this mean). 
  a. processEvent() manages each step. Between parses it will be changed to the addEvent function
4. First pass: record all new LPs into the lpNameMap and count number of events sent/received by each LP. also count total events in the simulation.
5. addEvent() processes the function for the second pass over the file.
6. Check to  see if all LPs sent an event and all received events
7. Sort the events in each LP by receive time
8. Event received summaries. Sliced and assigned to a different goroutine.
  a. Compute the local/remote event data
  b. Record the LPs that send events to this LP and compute the coverage statistics
  c. local, global, and linked chain info for each LP
    i. local = events sent and received by the same LP
    ii. remote = sent by another LP
9. Event chains are collections of events for execution at the LP that could be executed together. When evaluating an event with receive timestamp _t_, chain is formed by all future (by receive time) events in that LP that have a send time less than _t_. Local chains musst also be self generated events. Global chains can be sent from any LP.
10. Linked event chains are similar to the local chain except that the constraint on the send time is relaxed so that any event sent within the time window of the local event chain (any event generated by the chain is also potentially a member of the chain).
11. Local chain: (i) generated by this LP and (ii) send time is less than the receive time of the event at the head of the chain
12. Linked chains: (i) generated by this LP and (ii) if it's send time is less than or equal to the receive time of any event currently in the chain. (test against last event already in the chain)
13. Global chains: has a send time less than the receive time of any event currently in the chain
14. Chains are created by invoking each thread.
15. Totals of the local and global event chains. Sum the local/global event chains for all of the LPs in the system. 
16. Summary matrix of the number of events exchanged btwn two LPs. Capture the min, max, and average delta btwn send and receive time (lookahead analysis). 
17. Analysis data on the events processed by an LP. Most relating to the intervals of receive time between adjacent events in an LP.
18. Number of events executed in a fixed time interval at random locations of the LP's executed events. See if the LP executes events at a mostly stationary rate throughout the execution or if there are hot/cold spots during the simulation run where the LP executes significantly more or less events. Initially set at 10 samples of 100 events. If the sample finishes the list of events in the LP before reaching the end of the time interval, rejected and a new count is started at a different location. 
19. Mean time interval for numSampleEvents at various points of the executed events. 
20. Create a total events processed file to keep track of receiving LP, number of events processed, min timestamp delta, max timestamp delta, average timestamp delta, st. dev. of the mean. 
21. Events available for execution: assume all events execute in unit time and evaulate the events as executable by simulation cycle. Advance the simulation time to the lowest receive time of events in all of the LPs and count the number of LPs that could potentially be executed at that time. 